# Zonemaster Benchmarking Tools

These tools automates the benchmarking of **Zonemaster**, a DNS zone testing and validation framework.
It runs predefined tests on a list of domains, measures performance and consolidates results into a single dataset for analysis.

- `benchcli` is a python script to benchmark `zonemaster-cli` and `gonemaster`
- `zonemaster-benchmark` is a perl script to benchmark `zonemaster-engine`

***

## Setup

This project use [mise](https://mise.jdx.dev/) to setup the environement.

```
❯ mise install         # install : python, go, perl, hyperfine
❯ mise dep             # install python and perl dependencies
❯ mise zonemaster      # install zonemaster-cli from cpanm
❯ mise gonemaster      # install gonemaster
```

***

## ./benchcli usage

time 
```
❯ ./benchcli zonemaster.se
```

options availables:

- `(--batch [BATCH] | --report [REPORT ...] | domain)`: one of these is required
   1. `domain`: run the test on this domain only
   2. `--batch [BATCH]`: run the test on multiple domain, `BATCH` file contain one domain name by line 
   3. `--report [REPORT ...]`: generate the report on previous run, `REPORT` file is file generated by `--output` option
- `[--log-level [{CRITICAL,ERROR,WARNING,INFO,DEBUG}]]`: set log-level
- `[--cache]`: use the `--restore`, if the cache file doesnt exist, it will be generated first
- `[--cache_dir CACHE_DIR]`: set the directory where cache file are stored, by default it is `/tmp`
- `[--runs [RUNS]]`: number of runs by domain, it's passed to `hyperfine`
- `[--output OUTPUT]` : write result into the file `OUTPUT`
- `[--profile PROFILE]` : pass a profile to `zonemaster-cli`, usefull if you want to test a limited set of testcase
- `[--bin [BIN]]` : you can benchmark other tools, like `gonemaster`, if they have the same CLI interface.


### Exemples

Test `zonemaster-cli` on a single domain, 10 times 

Test gonemaster on a list of domain in `domains.txt` with 3 runs by domain and write the output data in `report.json`
```
❯ ./benchcli --bin gonemaster --runs 3 --batch domains.txt --output report.json
```


Full test of DNSSEC testcase of zonemaster with caches
```shell
# generate the profile file
❯ zonemaster-cli --dump-profile > profile-test.json
# edit profile-test.json to select DNSSEC testcase
❯ vim profile-test.json
# get cache files without runing tests (runs is set to 0)
❯ ./benchcli --batch input.txt --profile profile-test.json --runs 0 --cache --cache_dir ./caches/
# run tests and write results in dnssec-report.json
❯ ./benchcli --batch input.txt --profile profile-test.json --runs 3 --cache --cache_dir ./caches/ --output dnssec-report.json
# print the report
❯ ./benchcli --report dnssec-report.json
```


This script automates three main operations:

1. **Cache** — Generates cache files for each domain and Zonemaster test type to speed up future runs.
2. **Run** — Executes benchmarks using `hyperfine` for each domain and test, exporting JSON output enriched with Zonemaster version details.
3. **Gather** — Collects and merges all benchmark results into a single `dataframe.json` file ready for statistical or graphical analysis.

The goal is to make performance comparisons between different Zonemaster versions and modules easy and repeatable.

***


## ./zonemaster-benchmark

```
❯ ./zonemaster-benchmark zonemaster.se
❯ ./zonemaster-benchmark zonemaster.se --runs 10
❯ ./zonemaster-benchmark zonemaster.se --cache --cache_dir ./caches/
```

options availables:

- `--batch FILE`
- `--profile PROFILE`
- `--cache`
- `--cache_dir DIR`
- `--runs NB`
- `--output FILE`

***

### Batch file

Scripts expects a text file (e.g. domains.txt) containing one domain name per line, for example:

```
zonemaster.net
internetstiftelsen.se
afnic.fr
```


***

## Future Improvements

- [ ] Generate detailed performance reports from `dataframe.json`.
- [ ] Create an HTML summary dashboard for quick result visualization.
- [x] Add an option to specify which tests to run with `zonemaster-cli`.
- [ ] Implement support for custom benchmark profiles.


